Well, yeah, one other thing I better say, I will ask you questions that are very obvious
and that I know the answers to, you know, but the listeners may not, so some of them
will just be simple background.
Right.
Okay.
Whatever you wish.
First of all, could you say just a few brief words about the when the Tolkien Society was
formed and, you know, basics like its membership and the number of countries that belong to
it, things of that sort?
The Society was founded in England in 1969 with a very small group of members.
The Society has grown gradually over the years, various notices in various books, directory
listings and so on.
We now have 1,200 members, approximately, in 26 countries throughout the world.
So, although we're based in England, I think we have the largest worldwide spread.
And the Society, I believe, has two publications.
What are those?
We have two regular publications.
Amonhen is approximately bimonthly, is a bulletin and a newsletter, letters of comment
from members, short articles, short poems, small artwork.
It's really for immediate consumption, the ephemeral material.
And the other publication is Malon, the journal, very much more academic.
It comes out, we hope, twice a year.
So, sometimes we get the Malon and Amonhen together.
Malon is a larger format.
It has longer poems.
Sometimes they run to three pages, members' own poems, in the Tolkien manner.
Some of them are imitations of Tolkien's style.
Others are members' own work in their own styles.
Essays, longer book reviews, articles of rather more specific interest.
And it is very much less time dependent.
What about any kinds of gatherings or meetings or fellowship among the members?
Is there any kind of activity of that sort?
Oh, yes, considerable.
Our local groups are called Smiles.
From the Hobbit Smile is a comfortable Hobbit whole.
And we hope that our members feel as comfortable in our smiles as they would in a Hobbit home.
We have Smiles in many countries.
In some countries, there just aren't enough members to get together because they're too widely separated.
But in England, there are Smiles all over the country.
They run themselves as they wish.
Some of them are very formal, some have costume, others don't.
Some publish their own little newsletters with subsequent meeting venues, short reviews of artwork.
It just depends on what the members in any particular area wish to do.
Are there other types of functions, like for instance the kind we have in America here,
with costuming and feasting and things of that nature?
We have two national meetings a year of organised formality.
There's the annual general meeting, which is a business meeting, which is our formal event.
We have a formal dinner with speakers and guests.
It is not a convention.
The other meeting, which is in fact the largest of the National Gatherings,
larger, with two of them I should say, is Oxenmoot, held in Oxford over a weekend in late September.
And it is a weekend where members who otherwise don't normally see other people come together.
The Smiles send representative groups.
Other societies send representative groups.
This year we should have groups from Stockholm.
There will be a representative from America.
There will be groups from all over the United Kingdom.
And it is just a weekend of being in company of Tolkien people.
We have had an impromptu linguistic discussion with an Englishman, a Frenchman, a Swede,
a Dutchman and an Norwegian.
And we were all speaking English of one sort or another.
It was quite interesting seeing the comparative linguistic analyses compared with their own translations.
This question I think may be a little difficult to answer.
Do you have any impressions of the...
Let's put it this way.
Are there differences between American Tolkien fans and British?
I would imagine the American fans may be a bit more...
Oh, what? Less serious perhaps.
Excellent.
Yes.
Yeah, most definitely.
American fans are very much more exuberant in the way they go about things.
We are...
Well, some people think we may be a little bit too state and too formal.
But it suits...
Well, it sounds a little bit high-handed to say so,
but it suits our purpose to be more literary and to keep our costume event down to one a year.
If we did everything in costume, then it might lose some of its interest,
because that is not how we were set up.
The Swedish societies, of which there are three major ones,
do things in costume.
They are specifically organized in a manner very similar, in fact, to the American SCA.
They do society for creative anachronism.
They do things in costume with weapons and they have guilds.
But they don't publish quite so much as we do.
But there is room in Tolkien fandom for all sorts.
And it will be a poorer place without either of us.
Is the Tolkien society in contact with members of the Tolkien family?
And do they ever...?
Yes, in quite considerable contact, I'm pleased to say.
Oxenmoot is usually...
Well, for the past...
Since we started holding Oxenmoots, we have been honored by Priscilla Tolkien
coming along to our party on Saturday.
She usually manages to bring some other family members with her.
And on the Sunday, we are all invited up to her house for a drink and much more talk.
And she's got a small house.
And when you get nearly a hundred fans or crammed into one small house in the garden,
it can sometimes be a little difficult to move around.
Oxenmoot this year, which has now happened, was under canvas this year
on the farm of Joan Baker, Michael Tolkien's daughter.
So the professor's granddaughter had the society pitch camp, as it were,
after the harvest.
And I couldn't get to that, unfortunately.
No, I'm telling you lies.
It hasn't happened yet.
I don't think it's all wrong.
It happens just before I get back from America, so I couldn't get to it.
By the time this is broadcast, it may very well have been over.
Probably will be.
We'll take care of that.
What about Christopher Tolkien?
Do you have any correspondence?
Or does he contribute anything?
Or does he make you aware of papers that he still has, perhaps?
We only wish he did.
Christopher is extremely busy with the papers.
He is the literary executor.
And much as we would like to be in close contact with him to answer all our questions,
we would also like him to stay where he is somewhere in France,
busy editing to publish more material.
So we don't, in fact, have any contact with him.
That isn't by choice, rather than by imposition.
Anything that we do find, we find out through various other sources.
But we do not have any correspondence directly with Christopher.
It would be unfair to bombard him with questions
when the publication of the next book quite easily answer all those questions for us.
Do you have any idea of any significant material that may be unpublished that's left
that he might be working on?
Well, there is a great deal of linguistic material still to be published.
Whether it will be published as a book of linguistic matters,
or whether they will end up as footnotes in other books, I don't know.
There is a great deal of poetry.
The Silmarillion had a remarkable lack of verse,
which we are waiting to see.
There may be other tales filling in some gaps in Middle Earth.
But all we know is that there were the papers sat in box files on a table eight feet long.
There is a considerable amount of material.
How much of it is publishable is not known.
How much of it is readable is, again, a matter for debate,
because towards the end of his life the professor's handwriting
became not so much untidy as illegible, and even Christopher can't read it.
I've heard that some of his material may even perhaps maybe personal journals
have been written in Elvish, is that correct?
They were written in Tangua, yes, certainly.
Whether they were written in the Elvish language, either of them, I don't know.
I somehow doubt it.
It would be nice if they were, because then we'd have a much larger vocabulary to work with.
Humphrey around across his travel when he was writing the biography,
some of the diaries were written in Tangua, and Humphrey had to learn the Tangua,
so that he could read the diaries and find out what he was trying to write about.
I heard you answer this over in the Tolkien a little while ago,
but I'd like you to make a restatement of this.
Is this the Tolkien society, the one in England or the ones in America,
are they going to run out of material ever?
Is this something that can be ongoing, or is it after you do a certain amount of work
and get a certain amount of books out and so forth, is it over with?
Well, there are always new people coming in to the society,
as people discover Middle Earth at all ages.
And people will be asking the same sort of questions,
but they'll be asking them in different ways,
and as more and more material gets published, interpretations will vary.
I think there will be sufficient interest, after all, Sherlock Holmes society has been
going for some time, and there's now no longer any possibility of more Sherlock Holmes stories.
That doesn't seem to worry them at all.
And with what we already have of Middle Earth,
we can keep going for a considerable number of years.
And of course, we mustn't forget that the professor did a lot of pure academic linguistic
material, which is very difficult to find, but extremely worthwhile when you can find it.
And that will keep us going for a very, very long time.
Good. Okay. Just a couple more questions, maybe of a personal nature.
Why do you think people from so many different countries, so many different backgrounds,
languages and so forth, what is it about Tolkien that can draw them together,
that fascinates them?
Well, I can only say what the way I look at it, there are as many different answers to that
question as there are members, and maybe even more answers than members.
For my part, I think it fulfills a need that modern society has somehow missed out.
Fellowship is a very strong feeling throughout the books.
That seems to have disappeared from modern society. The idea of the high and the ancient
retaining some of its old power. Tolkien has been accused of stealing his ideas from other
mythological sources, which is irrelevant because those sources themselves borrowed
material from even earlier works. So that argument can be discounted. But it is,
there is a need for some sort of, well, it's not a religious belief.
The Tolkien would not have been happy with that suggestion. But it's a social aspect.
Modern society is becoming very isolated. Everyone's staying in their own little city and,
well, people move around by plane. But you don't get to meet people with the same
likes, the same dislikes, or even the same taste in literature. And societies like ours
are helping to put people in contact with each other. And so interchange ideas and opinions
and ways of looking at life. That's one of the best answers I've heard for that. And that's
very good. Thank you. Actually, that would be all I can think of that we would,
can you think of anything else that I might be missing or that you would
normally be asking this sort of interview that you could add? There are so much more,
I mean, in terms of the books themselves. I don't have good fast statistics at you.
In terms of society itself, maybe, or I can't think of anything else that,
I mean, that's why I have enough material. It's fine. I'm just wondering if,
you know, since this was done without plan on my part, I may have been missing some
ideas or things that I would have thought of had I had some more time to work it out.
Well, I'm satisfied. Well, I can't think of anything that screams for immediate publication.
I think that would work fine. I appreciate that. Thank you.
Let's just exactly what I wanted. Okay, one year. Okay, let's check.
I'm just an English teacher. Audio visual, man, might walk in halfway through the interview.
Okay, first of all, okay, now, obviously, I'll get some information from you before you go about,
you know, your name, your title, I mean, just any particulars about the show. So there'll be an
introduction to that. Right. Okay. First of all, can you just say a few words about the
the Science Fiction Poetry Association when it started? It was founded in January 1978 by Suzette
Hayden Elgin, who is a novelist that lives or writes mostly Ozark tales. And she was interested
in poetry and saw no basic form format or forum for poets within the science fiction or fantasy
genre, genres to get to know each other, to work together and act together and organize some sort
of a network for people to make science fiction poetry more available to readers, basically.
It's a national group, then you have members all over the country?
National group and our membership is up to 140. It doesn't sound like a whole lot, but we're kind
of on fire. Poets, you know, there are fewer numbers, but we're on fire.
Can you say anything? I mean, do you have a structure? Say a president? Things of that sort?
Yeah, our president is Jean Wolf. He's a well-known science fiction writer. And as the secretary,
Maureen Kaplan, she takes care of all the business. And I edit the newsletter, which is why you have
me sitting here. Okay, you edited the newsletter then, okay. At the moment, the newsletter seems to
be the focus of the organization because we don't have any great amount of business that is important
to us. We're sort of like a very small, non-profit organization, and just basically people getting
to know each other and setting up workshops at conventions, doing readings, teaching each other
a little bit about poetry, helping each other find good markets. Some of us are editors of poetry
magazines. Some of us are editor of literary magazines. Some of us are just dabblers in poetry. Some of
us take marketing poetry seriously. Some of us write poetry to great lengths. Some people just
like to read poetry. Everybody is welcome to the organization. Are most of your members those
science fiction fans too? It seems to work out that way, but percentage-wise, it's probably,
well, 75%, I would say, but I should think it should be 90 in one sense. And I feel it shows
that we do have at least 25% membership of people who just are interested in poetry altogether,
which is healthy. I mean, we're not trying to be separate from the mainstream of literary
mainstream with poetry, that's for sure. Well, you're not trying to be separate.
Well, can you say a few words about what, is there a basic difference between
science fiction poetry and regular poetry? Well, there's several arguments about that. I think my
basic viewpoint is that it's science fiction or fantasy poetry if it's published within that
genre. And because a lot of the poetry really doesn't necessarily have to have unicorns or
spaceships in it, a lot of it can be about very peripheral things. I'd call them speculative
things. Well, is there anything about the style that would qualify or is it simply a sub-man?
Yeah, you can characterize it by the subject matter, but it doesn't have to be spaceships or
unicorns, like I said. It can be about, well, have you ever picked up a telephone and heard
someone talking on the line somewhere far in the distance? It's another conversation between two
other people. Well, say you wrote a poem about that in the context of like there were telephone
ghosts that kind of live in the telephone line, okay? That would be a mainstream poem or it could
be a science fiction poem because it deals sort of in that the same realm that imagination, that
fantastic imagination is in. When did you give me the start of the organization already briefly? But
was this sort of an invention, this genre? Or do you look back in the past and see poets from
the ancient world or previous ages who wrote this kind of poetry? Or is this something that's been
recognized just recently? Well, the first form of literature was poetry and the reason for it was
that they had to rhyme and meter it so that they could pass it on verbally generation to generation.
And from that prose spun off, you see. So poetry is very old and one of the very early
poetic epics is Gilgamesh. And if you're familiar with Gilgamesh, you might as well call that a
fantasy. It had its other reasons for being written. It was an instructive, it was an instructive
mythological tale, almost a fable in some ways and actually involves all sorts of
instructions for the people who were listening to it as it was passed through generations.
But it is fantastical in its content. Do you have, you mentioned that you read or gather sometimes
at different conventions and so forth. What about recognition or awards of that sort? Do you have
those? Yes, we sponsor an award. It's an annual award for the best long science fiction poem with
the air and the best short science fiction poem. And the cutting line is 50 lines. If it's over 50
lines, it's considered long. If it's under 50 lines, it's considered short. And the purpose we
basically sponsor the award is not only recognition to poets who are normally not getting recognition
within the field because poetry is basically used as a white space filler, a white hole filler,
but also as a promotion. I've been seeing, this is going to have to be edited out because I'm
dating the show here, but I've seen things around the convention about the Clark Ashton Smith Award.
Does that have anything to do with poetry? Yes, it's a committee award. There are like
eight, 10 people who supposedly have credentials about poetry and science fiction
worked up an elaborate three-part system for figuring out who would be awarded poems. And
it has much more categories and involves fantasy poetry. But that's not related to your organization
so much. It's not related to our organization. Okay, now do professional authors belong to your
group? I mean, are they part of your... Well, as far as I'm concerned, a poet that has published
somewhere is a professional author. If you're considering a name author, I can name them. If
you mean authors who take it seriously, there's plenty of us and a lot of us have only been
published in obscure places, but we take it seriously. I assume you're saying name authors.
Well, Gene Wolf's president is Ted Sturgeon, Michael Bishop,
Roger Zalazny. He signed up just before he went to
Ireland. Ursula K. Le Guin, Fizzy Land, David Arbunch, Edward Bryant, Gregory Benford.
Do all these authors themselves, I take it, write science fiction poetry?
Tom Dish. Yes, to some extent, or at least they write poetry. It doesn't matter so much in the
organization whether you write science fiction poetry or not. If you're interested in science
fiction and you write poetry, you know, those kind of people join too. But it is sort of...
It's a gathering of people who at some point may reorganize into something different the moment
we're getting to know each other and reading each other's poems and kind of
making the science fiction genre and literary genres all together aware that the
modern scientific thought and the mode of poetry as a literary format of explaining yourself,
or creating a fiction, have come together quite well in our modern times.
I take it that there's no money in this. Nobody does it for the money.
Well, no, I think that's true with almost every poet in the United States. They actually,
even the ones that you could name, which are professional and well known, make much more
money doing university talk circuits than they do off of their own poetry books and in science fiction,
most you can get for a poem is basically $25. And if you're getting published in something like
Isaac Asimov's, your chances are you'd have one poem a year there. So it's a competition for what's
very little white space to fill. Okay, I just lost my train of thought. I had another question.
Okay, this is sort of a philosophical question.
Does science fiction poetry, can you do anything with science fiction poetry, or does it offer
anything that would make it special or different than normal poetry? It's gonna be a little hard
to take that one off the top of my head, but I do have at least one angle I see on that.
Yes, today, science has found some things about the universe, especially let's use physics as an
example, or found some things because science has become so specialized. And that any scientist
today is almost a specialist in this field. We're discovering the real depths of a lot of science,
including psychology, but let's pick physics. Okay, if come up against things like black holes,
singularities, monopoles, and these are things which cannot be systematically and rationally explained.
And you will find in the scientific texts that are discussing these possibilities,
and these kind of rips in Einsteinian space time continuum, or however you want to look at them,
their anomalies. The science books are using, even like Carl Sagan will use a poem, for example,
to help explain, to help visualize what it could possibly be or how it exists. And because poetry
can in a small space deal with something which can be abstract, doesn't always have to be abstracting,
doesn't have to be unreadable, and it doesn't have to be boring. But because it can deal with some
things that are abstract in a small amount of space, poetry can be or poetic talk, even if it's in a
prose sense, or even in a speech, can deal with with abstract things nicely. Okay, very good.
The only poetry that I've been familiar with that would belong to the field of fantasy and
science fiction, I think it would be the work of, say like Robert E. Howard, and so forth,
he's published first. Now that, I guess, would be sword and sorcery, fantasy, whatever you
wanted to call it. Does that qualify? I would qualify that as a fantasy poetry. Certainly,
he was a man who was writing basically for a fantasy market, and was using the same thematic
material in his poems. That qualifies. You don't want me to make a judgment on this poetry.
Go ahead. I think it stinks. Okay. Anything else? You want me to quote that? No, that's okay.
I don't know how to quite phrase this one. You can edit that out. Okay.
Speaking of a name author for a moment, okay, a name author,
I guess you'd have to make a judgment here to be a very personal kind of response, but
why would that person who can make some money,
spent writing short stories and novels and so forth, why would he dabble or write in poetry?
Well, knowing a lot of these people that you would pick, possibly, or people we mentioned
previously, a lot of them wrote poetry first, and extensively. And they seem to be people who weren't
squelched in the public high school system about the boredom, the abstract, and the unreadability
of poetry, and that they wrote it during their high school times and their early youth,
and possibly gave up writing altogether, and then came back with an urge to write
and a strong urge and a money-making urge, and went to prose and write prose well,
but never have lost the interest in poetry. And also, writers just tend to write in any form they
can. A lot of them don't, the name writers you're thinking of, or we're talking about don't write
all that much poetry, but you know, writers write, and they'll pick any format they can in order to
say what's proper, and in the style that's proper for what they want to say. Poetry is often much
better for what you want to say than is prose or nonfiction. Do you have any particular titles,
either of books or poems, that you think are particularly good that anybody listening might
get ahold of if they would like to know more about this? I suggest a book called Holding
Your Aide Hands. It's been reprinted as a paperback by Doubleday last year. It originally was
published in 1969. The editor is Edward Lucy Smith, and it's a collection of science fiction
poetry, an international collection actually, although not widely international as British,
and I think some Australian authors and American authors in it. There's an anthology of poetry
coming out from a man here in Denver, Steve Razznick-Tem, and it's an offshoot of a magazine
he's been editing of speculative poetry for three or four years. It's called The Umbrell
Anthology, and it will use poetry out of what I see as the history of science fiction poetry.
There's also coming up an anthology in a couple of years by Bruce McAllister and Dick Allen,
who are both writers of science fiction poetry, and both people who work in academic jobs in the
United States, which is going to attempt to do the same thing, create a comprehensive anthology
of some sort. And there is Starline, which is our newsletter, which publishes original poetry.
Markets, we have a workshop in there. We have news related to science fiction and poetry.
We have letter columns and everything that basically ties our organization together.
There are some small literary magazines which totally focus on science fiction.
Uranus comes out of Wisconsin, and there are some that that's one example of that.
And then as a peripheral magazine that might be a small press science fiction magazine, but which
is, uses poetry quite a bit. There's Owl Flight, which comes out of Oroville, California, I believe.
Oakland, California, I'm sorry. And Aurora, which is another Madison, comes out of Madison,
Wisconsin. It's a five minute science fiction magazine.
Sounds like this is something that's going to catch on very fast then.
Since I've been involved in it, it is caught on like Wildflower. Edit that one.
Since I've been involved in it, it is caught on like Wildfire.
With Isaac Asimov's an amazing using sometimes three to four poems an issue.
And since about 1978, the theme anthology has become real popular in science fiction.
Say on the theme of shape changing, the future at war, let's say, time travel without a spaceship,
various very specific theme anthologies, and a lot of them have been buying poetry.
There's one thing I didn't quite catch at the beginning. I want to ask it again.
Maybe you didn't say it or maybe you didn't catch it. Who are who is the individual or
individuals who was most responsible for starting the science fiction poetry association?
The ladies name is Suzette Hayden Elgin. She is a professional science fiction writer who
is well known and right now lives in Arkansas.